---
layout: post
title: "A custom shell function (userbin) for simplifying development of CL tools"
categories: code shell
---

While I was packaging [notes](https://github.com/kylebebak/notes), a note-taking command line program I wrote, [for distribution via Homebrew](./distribute-program-via-homebrew), I ran into difficulties managing my `PATH`.

To make sure notes installed via  `brew install notes` works the same as notes in my development repo, I installed notes via Homebrew. The executable I use daily is the one living in the keg in `/usr/local/Cellar`, which gets added to `PATH` via a symlink in `/usr/local/bin`.

However, if I want to make changes to the program, I have to add the development version of notes to my `PATH`, ahead of `/usr/local/bin/notes`, in order to test it. When I'm done I have to remove the development version from my `PATH` so that notes references `/usr/local/bin/notes` again. This can get really annoying.

To solve this problem, I wrote __userbin__, a shell function that creates or removes a symlink from `$HOME/bin` to any executable. The function accepts just one argument: the __path__ to the executable when creating the symlink, or its __name__ when removing it. The syntax is forgiving and intuitive:

- both `userbin some/path/<exe>` and `userbin <exe>` will remove `~/bin/<exe>`, if the symlink exists
- if it doesn't `userbin path/to/<exe>` will create `~/bin/<exe>`, as long `path/to/<exe>` is valid

This function depends on `$HOME/bin` coming first in your `PATH`. This is as easy as adding `PATH="${HOME}/bin:${PATH}"` to the end of your startup script.

__userbin__ is one of various functions I define in `~/.custom_functions.sh`, a script I source in `.zshrc`. It's useful for anyone developing and testing a command line tool themselves. Here's the source code:

~~~sh
function userbin(){
  bin="${HOME}/bin"
  exe=`basename $1`
  src="$(pwd)/$1"
  tgt="${bin}/${exe}"
  
  if [ -L $tgt ]; then
    rm $tgt
    echo "removed ${exe} from ${bin}"
    return 0
  fi

  if [ -f $src ]; then
    ln -s $src $tgt
    echo "linked ${src} to ${tgt}"
    return 0
  fi

  echo "the file ${src} doesn't exist"
  return 1
}
~~~

