---
layout: post
title: "A custom shell function (userbin) for simplifying development of CL tools"
categories: code shell
tags: [shell, dotfiles, dev-hacks]
---

While I was packaging [notes](https://github.com/kylebebak/notes), a note-taking command line program I wrote, [for distribution via Homebrew](./distribute-program-via-homebrew), I ran into difficulties managing my `PATH`.

To make sure notes installed via  `brew install notes` works the same as notes in my development repo, I installed notes via Homebrew. The executable I use daily is the one living in the keg in `/usr/local/Cellar`, which gets added to `PATH` via a symlink in `/usr/local/bin`.

However, if I want to make changes to the program, I have to add the development version of notes to my `PATH`, ahead of `/usr/local/bin/notes`, in order to test it. When I'm done I have to remove the development version from my `PATH` so that notes references `/usr/local/bin/notes` again. This can get really annoying.

To solve this problem, I wrote __userbin__, a shell function that creates or removes a symlink from `$HOME/.local/bin` to any executable. The function accepts just one argument: the __path__ to the executable when creating the symlink, or its __name__ when removing it. The syntax is forgiving and intuitive:

- both `userbin any/path/<exe>` and `userbin <exe>` will remove `$HOME/.local/bin/<exe>`, if the symlink exists
- if it doesn't, `userbin path/to/<exe>` will create `$HOME/.local/bin/<exe>`, as long as `path/to/<exe>` is valid
- multiple executables can be passed, and userbin will attempt to link or unlink all of them

This function depends on `$HOME/.local/bin` coming first in your `PATH`. This is as easy as adding `PATH="${HOME}/.local/bin:${PATH}"` to the end of your startup script.

__userbin__ is one of various functions I define in `~/.custom_functions.sh`, a script I source in `.zshrc`. It's useful for anyone developing and testing a command line tool themselves. Here's the source code:

~~~sh
function userbin(){
  bin="${HOME}/.local/bin"

  while test $# -gt 0; do
    exe=`basename $1`
    tgt="${bin}/${exe}"
    src="$(pwd)/$1"

    if [ -L $tgt ]; then
      rm $tgt
      echo "removed ${exe} from ${bin}"
      shift && continue
    fi

    if [ -f $src ]; then
      ln -s $src $tgt
      echo "linked ${src} to ${tgt}"
      shift && continue
    fi

    echo "the file ${src} doesn't exist"
    return 1
  done

  return 0
}
~~~

