---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "SOP and CORS, and how CSRF Protection Depends on SOP"
categories: code security
tags: [security, web, csrf, sop, cors, django]
---


http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/216605/how-do-web-servers-enforce-the-same-origin-policy


The same origin policy is a wholly client-based restriction, and is primarily engineered to protect users, not services.

You're asking for a server-side mechanism to distinguish between requests made by my program (which can send anything) and requests made by a browser that has a page loaded from a permitted origin. It simply can't be done


The same-origin policy was invented because it prevents code from one website from accessing credential-restricted content on another site.




http://security.stackexchange.com/questions/97825/is-cors-helping-in-anyway-against-cross-site-forgery


All the SOP does is prevent the response from being read by another domain (aka origin). This is irrelevant to whether a CSRF attack is successful or not.


All CORS does is relax the SOP when it is active. It does not increase security, it simply allows some exceptions to take place.


So if you have http://data.example.org you can set response headers to allow http://site.example.com to make AJAX requests and retrieve data from your API.


## What does it protect against?

### EVERYTHING
Without SOP, evil.com has JS that makes a GET request against `bank.com/account_info`. Cookies are sent automatically, including the auth cookie for `bank.com`. `bank.com` obliges, returns the contents of `bank.com/account_info`, evil.com reads the contents, game over

So, SOP will allow the browser to make the request, but it won't allow it to READ the contents.

Relation to CSRF: without SOP, JS from siteB makes AJAX GET request against a page on siteA, which has form with embedded CSRF token in hidden form field. siteB can read response, parse DOM tree, find token, and then make a POST request against siteB with token inserted in body. Voila, CSRF protection implemented by siteA is broken.
