---
layout: post
title: "Eslint, the configurable next-gen (ES6, JSX) JavaScript linter"
categories: code javascript
---

[Eslint](https://github.com/eslint/eslint) is a next-gen JS linter executable that allows you to configure linting on a project by project basis. It supports ES6 and JSX syntax.

Unlike most packages installed via `npm`, it makes most sense to install eslint globally: `npm install -g eslint`. Running `eslint --init` in a project directory will prompt you to pick a popular style guide or answer a series of questions to generate your `.eslintrc.*` file (YAML, JS, or JSON).

This file differentiates `eslint` from other linters like `jshint` or `pyflakes`: `eslint` won't even run without it. If gives you fine-grained control of what should raise an error, what should raise a warning, and what should be ignored. If there is no `.eslintrc.*` file in the current directory, eslint will traverse upward and look for it in the parent directory, until it gets to your home directory. As with many [config](http://eslint.org/docs/user-guide/configuring) dotfiles, the default file should go here. This is mine:

~~~js

module.exports = {
    "rules": {
        "indent": [
            1,
            2
        ],
        "quotes": [
            1,
            "single"
        ],
        "linebreak-style": [
            2,
            "unix"
        ],
        "semi": [
            1,
            "always"
        ],
        "comma-dangle": [
            0,
        ],
        "no-unused-vars": [
            1,
        ]
    },
    "env": {
        "es6": true,
        "browser": true,
        "node": true
    },
    "extends": "eslint:recommended",
    "ecmaFeatures": {
        "modules": true,
        "jsx": true,
        "forOf": true,
        "experimentalObjectRestSpread": true
    },
    "plugins": [
        "react"
    ]
};

~~~

By default, I can lint JS written for the browser or written for Node, with general support for ES6, and specific `ecmaFeatures` such as `jsx`, `modules` and `forOf` loops enabled.

## JSX and other syntaxes
If you want to lint JSX, an additional npm package, `eslint-plugin-react`. If you want to be sure this is in your path (for example, so that [SublimeLinter](../sublime-text/sublime-linter) can see it), install it globally. If you set up a new project with `eslint --init` and indicate that you want to lint JSX, eslint will automatically install this plugin locally.

## One linter to rule them all
Very few linters offer the customizability of eslint. Back in the day, before the profusion of frameworks, being able to configure a linter might have seemed like overkill. If you don't like how `pyflakes` does things, you just install a different linter, like `pep8`. Modern JavaScript, however, is a different beast. It's used to build nearly anything - single page web apps, servers, APIs, mobile apps, command line tools, etc - and syntax and coding conventions vary accordingly. A linter dealing with these use cases needs to be customizable, and that's why eslint is the JS linter to rule them all.
